Docs 7232 clean up arm analytics topic hn (#318)
mulesoft/docs-runtime-manager: modules/ROOT/pages/sending-data-from-arm-to-external-analytics-software.adoc

= Exporting Data to External Analytics Tools
ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]

image:logo-cloud-disabled.png[link="/runtime-manager/deployment-strategies#cloudhub", title="CloudHub"]
image:logo-hybrid-active.png[link="/runtime-manager/deployment-strategies#hybrid", title="Hybrid"]
image:logo-server-active.png[link="/runtime-manager/deployment-strategies#anypoint-platform-private-cloud-edition", title="Anypoint Platform PCE"]
image:logo-rtf-disabled.png[link="/runtime-manager/deployment-strategies#anypoint-runtime-fabric", title="Runtime Fabric"]

You can configure the Runtime Manager agent to export data to external analytics tools.

Using either the Runtime Manager cloud console or Anypoint Platform Private Cloud Edition, you can:

* Send Mule event notifications, including flow executions and exceptions, to Splunk or ELK.
+
See <<Integrating with Splunk>> and <<Integrating with Your ELK Stack>>.
* Send API Analytics to Splunk or ELK.
+
See <<Integrating API Analytics with Splunk or ELK>>.

> If you plan to export your payload's contents to be logged, keep in mind that not all formats can be exported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you plan to export your payload's contents to be logged, consider that not all formats can be exported.
```

See xref:about-logging-of-payload-formats.adoc[Payload Formats and Logging].

Sending data to third-party tools is not supported for applications deployed on xref:cloudhub.adoc[CloudHub].

> You can use the CloudHub custom log appender to integrate with your logging system. 

Reviewer: I had no idea that "appender" was a word! My, my, my...the things you young people come up with!  lol

See xref:custom-log-appender.adoc[Integrating with Your Logging System Using Log4j].

== Prerequisites

* Mule runtime engine version 3.6 or later
+
To forward events from API analytics to both an external tool and Anypoint Platform, the following versions are required:
+
** Mule version 4.2.0 or later 
** Mule version 3.9.3 or later 

* API gateway standalone version 2.1.0 or later
* Runtime Manager agent 1.2.0 or later
+
To send data to Splunk using the HTTP Event Collector or over TCP, Runtime Manager agent 1.3.1 or later is required.
+
For information about updating the agent, see xref:installing-and-configuring-runtime-manager-agent.adoc[Install or Update the Runtime Manager Agent].

=== Splunk Prerequisites 

To send data to Splunk using the HTTP Event Collector, you must first set up the data input and obtain a token from Splunk:

. Sign in to your Splunk account.

> . Navigate to *Settings* -> *Data Inputs*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Navigate to *Settings* > *Data Inputs*.
```

. For the *HTTP Event Collector* type, click *Add new*.

> // image::splunk-datainput-setup.png[Splunk settings]

Reviewer: image to come?

. Follow the steps to set up the data input and obtain the token.

To send data to Splunk over TCP, you must first enable the input source in Splunk:

. Sign in to your Splunk account.

> . Navigate to *Settings* -> *Data Inputs*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Navigate to *Settings* > *Data Inputs*.
```

. For the *TCP* type, click *Add new*.
// image::splunk-datainput-setup-tcp.png[splunk settings]
. Follow the steps to set up the data input.

> For more information about setting up data inputs, see the https://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/8.0.2/Data/WhatSplunkcanmonitor[Splunk Documentation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about setting up data inputs, see the https://docs.splunk.com/Documentation/Splunk/8.0.2/Data/WhatSplunkcanmonitor[Splunk documentation].
```

> == Logging Level Options 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Logging-Level Options 
```

The following logging levels are available when configuring integration with Splunk or ELK:

Business Events::

> Flow start/end, async messages, exceptions, and custom events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flow start or end, async messages, exceptions, and custom events
```

Tracking::
Business Events plus exception strategy, and endpoint messages
Debug::

> Tracking plus message processor begin/end

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tracking plus message processor begin and end
```

== Integrating with Splunk

With http://www.splunk.com/[Splunk], you can capture and index Mule event notification data into a searchable repository from which you can then generate graphs, reports, alerts, dashboards, and visualizations.

> . <<Configure the Agent in Your Splunk Instance>>. 

Reviewer: Steps?

Author: Yes.

. <<Configure Splunk Integration in Runtime Manager>>. 

=== Configure the Agent in Your Splunk Instance 

> To integrate with Splunk, you must create a new source type on your Splunk instance with the correct configuration to parse the HTTP events sent by the Runtime Manager agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To integrate with Splunk, you must create and configure a new source type on your Splunk instance that can parse the HTTP events sent by the Runtime Manager agent.
```
OR
```suggestion
To integrate with Splunk, you must create a new source type on your Splunk instance and configure it to parse the HTTP events sent by the Runtime Manager agent.
```
OR
```suggestion
To integrate with Splunk, you must create a new source type on your Splunk instance that can parse the HTTP events sent by the Runtime Manager agent.
```

== Prerequisites

* Mule 3.6 or later, or API gateway standalone version 2.1.0 or later
* Runtime Manager agent 1.2.0 or later is required
+
See xref:installing-and-configuring-runtime-manager-agent.adoc[Install or Update the Runtime Manager Agent].

== Use Runtime Manager with a Third-Party Analytics Tool

> In order to have Runtime Manager send data to an external analytics tool, you must follow these steps, which are explained in detail further down.

Reviewer 2: If you're removing the sections below does it make sense to keep this section? Also maybe it's my lack of understanding but why are we removing the ARM agent registration steps?

Author: Looks like you've made a comment on an earlier checkin. Subsequently removed.

KV_MODE = JSON
category = Mule Splunk Integration
description = Mule Agent event information
----

. Restart your Splunk instance for your changes to take effect.

=== Configure Splunk Integration in Runtime Manager 

To send Mule event notifications from the Runtime Manager agent to Splunk:

> . If you plan to send data to Splunk using the HTTP Event Collector or over TCP, check the <<Splunk Prerequisites>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If you plan to send data to Splunk using the HTTP Event Collector or over TCP, verify that your environment meets <<Splunk prerequisites>>.
```

Author: This is incorrect - It's not environment setup. They have to actually perform steps on Splunk.

. From Anypoint Platform, select *Runtime Manager*.
. Click the *Servers* tab.

> . Click the *Type* column to display the details pane for the server to configure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click the *Type* column to display the details pane for the server you want to configure.
```

+
See <<Logging Level Options>>.
. Click the gear icon to specify your Splunk configuration:
+
.The screenshot shows (*1*) the protocol option, (*2*) the data input types, and (*3*) the *Show more options* switch in the Splunk configuration window.
image::hybrid-export-splunk-configure.png[Protocol option, data input types, and Show more options switch in the Splunk configuration window]
+
See <<Splunk Configuration Options>>.
. Specify the host (IP address or hostname) and management port of the server where Splunk is running. 
+
* To send data to Splunk using the REST API, select *Rest API* and enter the username and password for your Splunk account.
* To send data to Splunk over TCP, select *tcp* from the menu and enter the username and password for your Splunk account.
* To send data to Splunk using the HTTP Event Collector, select *HTTP Event Collector* and paste the token from Splunk in the *Token* field:
+
.The screenshot shows (*1*) the *HTTP Event Collector* option and (*2*) the *Token* field in the Splunk configuration window.
image::hybrid-export-splunk-configure-http.png[HTTP Event Collector option and Token field in the Splunk configuration window]

> . If you want, click *Show more options* to specify formatting properties for the sent data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Optionally, click *Show more options* to specify formatting properties for the sent data:
```

Author: Punted per Kim

+
.The arrow shows the expanded options in the Splunk configuration window.
image::hybrid-export-splunk-configure-advanced.png[Expanded options in the Splunk configuration window]
+
See <<Splunk Configuration Options>>.
+
The *SSL Protocol* option applies only to the REST API data input type.
+
[IMPORTANT]

> If you set values for the Splunk index, Splunk source, and Splunk source type when you registered your data input in Splunk, any values you specify in this window overwrites those values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you set values for the Splunk index, Splunk source, and Splunk source type when you registered your data input in Splunk, any values you specify in this window overwrite those values.
```

. Click *Apply* to save your changes.

=== Splunk Configuration Options

Splunk integration includes the following configuration options:

[cols="20,30,20"]
|===

> |Field|Description|Default Value

Reviewer: Oh phooey. It just occurred to me that maybe we should be formatting field names as UI labels and values as syntax?

Author: On hold for now.

> |Username

Reviewer: Is this field name init. capped but the others lowercase in the UI?

Author: Yes. It's a mess.

(Required)
|Username to connect to Splunk
|

|Password 
(Required)
|Password associated with the Splunk username 
|

|host
(Required)
|IP address or hostname of the server where Splunk is running
|

|port
|Splunk management port
|8089

|protocol 
a|Protocol for the connection to the Splunk management port

> Possible values are http, https, and tcp.

Reviewer: This lowercasing is what made me think twice about the tagging....

Author: Punted for now per Kim

|https

|SSL Protocol (REST API only)

> a|SSL Security Protocol to use for the https connection

Reviewer: HTTPS? We are referring to a connection type, not the value input....

Possible values are TLSv1_2, TLSv1_1, TLSv1, and SSLv3.
|TLSv1_2

|Splunk Index

> a|Splunk index name to which to send all events

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a|Name of the Splunk index to send all events to
```
(I can't believe I just made that edit. But I did.)

> If the index doesn't exist, the internal handler creates it if the user has permission.

Reviewer: This might be putting too fine a point on it:
```suggestion
If the index doesn't exist, the internal handler creates it if the permissions associated with the username are adequate.
```

|main

|Splunk Source
|The source used for events sent to Splunk
|mule-events 

|Splunk Type 

> |The sourcetype used for events sent to Splunk

Reviewer: source type?

|mule

|Date Format
|Date format to use to format the timestamp
|yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ssSZ
|===

> // .Splunk Internal Handler Minimum Configuration Example

Reviewer: I know this is commented out, but what's the deal with the dot?

// [source,yaml]
// ----
//   mule.agent.gw.http.handler.splunk:
//     host: 192.168.61.131
//     user: admin
//     pass: test
// ----

== Integrating with Your ELK Stack

The ELK (Elasticsearch, Logstash, Kibana) stack enables you to store, search, and analyze the log data.

> You can configure the Runtime Manager agent to send event notifications from Mule runtime flows to a configurable log file.

Reviewer: runtime flows or just "flows"?

Logstash captures and indexes the data.

> Then, you can use Elasticsearch and Kibana to generate graphs, reports, alerts, dashboards, and visualizations.

Reviewer: Just an idea:

Logstash first captures and indexes the data; then, you can use Elasticsearch and Kibana to generate graphs, reports, alerts, dashboards, and visualizations

=== Configure the Log File for Your ELK Stack

To send event notifications to the folder from which your ELK stack reads:

. From Anypoint Platform, select *Runtime Manager*.
. Click the *Servers* tab.

> . Click the *Type* column to display the details pane for the server to configure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click the *Type* column to display the details pane for the server you want to configure.
```

. Click *Manage Server*.
. Click the *Plugins* tab:
+
.The screenshot shows (*1*) the *Event Tracking* options, (*2*) the *Level* menu, and (*3*) the gear icon on the server *Plugins* tab.
image::hybrid-export-splunk-elk.png[Event Tracking options, Level menu, and gear icon on the server Plugins tab.]

. Select the type of information to send from the *Level* menu.
+
See <<Logging Level Options>>.
. Under *Event Tracking*, enable *ELK*.
. Click the gear icon to configure the log file location for ELK:
+
.The screenshot shows (*1*) the log file location and (*2*) the *Show more options* switch in the ELK configuration window.
image::hybrid-export-elk-configure.png[Log file location and Show more options switch in the ELK configuration window]

> . If you want, click *Show more options* to specify additional properties for the log file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Optionally, click *Show more options* to specify additional properties for the log file:
```

Author: Punted for now per Kim

+
.The arrow shows the expanded options in the ELK configuration window.
image::hybrid-export-elk-configure-advanced.png[Expanded options in the ELK configuration window]

. Click *Apply* to save your changes.

== Integrating API Analytics with Splunk or ELK

To integrate API Analytics with Splunk or ELK:

> . <<Configure the API Gateway>>.

Reviewer: ditto re: steps?

Author: Yes. Steps.

. <<Configure API Analytics to Connect with Splunk or ELK>>.

[WARNING]

> If you configure the API gateway `wrapper.conf` (step 1) but don't assign an external destination for your data (step 2), the analytics data accumulates in a queue in the API gateway server, which could cause the system to crash.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you configure the API gateway `wrapper.conf` (Step 1) but don't assign an external destination for your data (Step 2), the analytics data accumulates in a queue in the API gateway server, which could cause the system to crash.
```

Reviewer: Should this warning appear with the previous use of these same steps?

Author: No - the steps are different. This applies to the API Gateway bit. For the other, the change is on the Splunk side.

=== Configure the API Gateway

To set up the connection to external analytics tools, configure the API gateway:

. In your API gateway standalone directory, open the `conf/wrapper.conf` file.
+

> The `.<n>` in the code snippets refers to an integer that is unique within `wrapper.conf`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `.<n>` value in the code snippets refers to an integer that is unique within `wrapper.conf`.
```

. Ensure that the following property is set to `true` and that the line is uncommented:
+
[source,java,linenums]
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Danypoint.platform.analytics_enabled=true
----

. Remove the URL from the following line:
+
[source,java,linenums]
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Danypoint.platform.analytics_base_uri=https://analytics-ingest.anypoint.mulesoft.com
----
+
The line now looks like the following:
+
[source,java,linenums]
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Danypoint.platform.analytics_base_uri=
----
. For Anypoint Platform Private Cloud Edition, change the `anypoint.platform.on_prem` parameter to `true`:
+
[source,java,linenums]
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Danypoint.platform.on_prem=true
----
+
If you are using the Runtime Manager cloud console, leave this parameter set to the default value, `false`. 

> ==== Configure Multiple Consumers 

Reviewer: At some point when you have time-HA!- you might look to find a way to avoid four levels of information nesting.

For Mule versions 4.2.0 and 3.9.3 and later, you can forward events to both an external tool and Anypoint Platform.

To configure multiple consumers, add the following line to the `wrapper.conf` file:

[source,java,linenums]
----
wrapper.java.additional.<n>=-Danypoint.platform.analytics_multiple_consumers_enabled=true
----

=== Configure API Analytics to Connect with Splunk or ELK

> After you've configured your API gateway, configure Splunk or ELK in Runtime Manager:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you configure your API gateway, configure Splunk or ELK in Runtime Manager:
```

. From Anypoint Platform, select *Runtime Manager*.
. Click the *Servers* tab.

> . Click the *Type* column to display the details pane for the server to configure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click the *Type* column to display the details pane for the server you want to configure.
```

. Click *Manage Server*.
. Click the *Plugins* tab:
+
.The arrow shows the *API Analytics* options on the server *Plugins* tab.
image::hybrid-export-api-analytics.png[API Analytics options on the server Plugins tab.]

. Under *API Analytics*, enable *ELK* or *Splunk*.

> . Click the gear icon and continue with step 8 in the following sections to complete the configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Click the gear icon and continue with Step 8 in the following sections to complete the configuration:
```
Do you suppose that there could come a time when the step numbers will change and the text be out of sync?

[WARNING]
If you modify your `wrapper.conf` file as described above but don't assign an external destination for your data (as you can do via the Runtime Manager UI), then this analytics data will be stored in a queue in the server where the API gateway is being run and could pile up to the point of crashing the system.

=== Integrate API Analytics with Splunk and ELK

After you've configured your API gateway, you can now return to Runtime Manager and see that your servers have some additional options in their menu.

image::sending-data-from-arm-to-external-monitoring-software-api-analytics.png[]

You can now set up the sending of API analytics to both Splunk and ELK, you configure exactly in the same way as you do when sending business events to them. See <<Integrating with an ELK Stack, Integrating with an ELK Stack>> and <<Integrating with Splunk, Integrating with Splunk>>.

> This section can be removed, I think VVVV

Reviewer 2: should this be an internal note? seems like a committed change.

Author: Looks like you've made a comment on an earlier checkin. Subsequently removed.
